### Domain

The *subject area* where a user applies a program is the domain. The
*critical complexity* in most software is understanding the domain. A
*problem domain* is the area of expertise or application that needs to
be examined to solve a problem. It is simply looking at topics you are
interested in and ignoring everything else.\
â€‹### Domain Model Illustrates conceptual classes in the problem domain
Concepts discovered lead to *design classes* It is a representation of
real-world conceptually classes, **NOT** software components. Hence also
known as *conceptual models*. Go with *the flow man*, no need for types
in your attributes, no need for methods, *keep it chill* The domain
model is grown *incrementally*, try find as many concepts as you can but
you can find more later *Nouns and Noun phrases* can help you find what
to include in your domain model Use a category list.n \#### Description
Class A *description class* contains information that describes
something else. Its better to keep the description separate. Use a
*description class* when there needs to be a description about an item
or service. A good example of why this would be needed. Say we have a
flight and an airport. If we delete the flight object, there is no
record now of the information of the flight. \#### Associations **An
association is a relationship between classes** Two classes can have
multiple associations A student attends a lecture. A student can also
tutor for a lecture. \### Advantage It can give us a better example of
the business domain,
