A *model* is a simplification of reality Each system can be described
with different aspects using different models A model can be either
*structural* or *behavioural* *Structural* emphasises the organisation
of a system - eg class diagram *Behavioural* emphasises the dynamics of
a system - Eg use case diagram \### Aims - Visualise the system as is or
to be - Specify structure/behaviour of a system - Template to guide
constructing a system - Document decisions we have made \### Approaches
**Algorithmic Perspective** - Main building block of software is the
procedure or function.

Leads focus on control and decomposition of larger algorithms into
smaller ones.

Systems become brittle as requirements change. **Object-Orientated
Perspective** - Building blocks of software is the objects or the class.
An object is a thing, a class is a description of a set of common
objects. Each object has *identity*, *state (data associated with it)*
and *behaviour* (what you can do with the object) \### Why? \#### Why
Models? - Abstract Reality - Filter out non-important details - Deal
with human limitations - Focus on the big picture \#### Why Objects? -
Reflect reality more accurately - Reduce semantic gap between reality
and a model \### Perspectives Ways to look at creating models
**Conceptual** - Do not consider any aspects of implementation - Focus
on identifying objects **Specification** - Consider interfaces of
objects - Focus on how objects interact **Implementation** - Consider
all details of objects - Focus on how to code objects \### Principles
**Principle 1 - Choice of Model is Important** - Models you create
influence how a problem is attacked and solution is shaped **Principle
2 - Levels of Precision May Differ** - Every model can be expressed with
different levels of precision **Principle 3 - The Models are Connected
to Reality** - All models simplify reality - A good model reflects
potentially fatal characteristics **Principle 4 - No Single Model is
Enough** - Every non-trivial system is best approached through a small
set of independent models - Create models that can be studied
separately, but are still interrelated
